docs(react-components): Add theming docs (#23080)
microsoft/fluentui: apps/public-docsite-v9/src/Concepts/Theming.stories.mdx

import { Meta, Source } from '@storybook/addon-docs';

<Meta title="Concepts/Developer/Theming" />

# Theming

> The Fluent UI Theme is represented by a set of tokens. Each token resolves to a single value which can be assigned to a CSS property.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
The Fluent UI Theme is represented by a set of tokens. Each token resolves to a single value which can be assigned to a CSS property.

```tsx
const theme = {
  tokenA: 'var(--tokenA)',
  // etc.
}
```
````

Will it be helpful to show what it actually means?

Author: Sure, but the theme object is semantic name -> raw value, so I added an example of that. The later sections explain how that is added to DOM and consumed in styles.

> You can browse all the available tokens in **Theme** section of the docs.

Reviewer 2: You can actually hyperlink to other pages or other parts of the same page. You can find some examples on the docs of build time optimization of Griffel

Author: Yeah, I know. the problem is Theme is a non-linkable section, not a page :-/

Reviewer 2: maybe just link to the most 'natural' part of that section like the color tokens ?

## How theme is applied

No matter what theme is used, the component styles are always the same. The only way to change the component styling is through theme tokens which can be used in style values.

> Those tokens are resolved to CSS variable usages. The `FluentProvider` component is responsible for setting the CSS variables in DOM and changing them when the theme changes. When the theme is switched, only the variables are changed, all styles remain the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Those tokens are resolved to CSS variables. The `FluentProvider` component is responsible for setting the values of the CSS variables in DOM and changing them when the theme changes. When the theme is switched, only the variables are changed, all styles remain the same.
```

> Place a `<FluentProvider />` at the root of your app and pass theme as a prop. The provider will render a `div` and will set all tokens as CSS variables on that element.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Place a `<FluentProvider />` at the root of your app and pass a theme to the `theme` prop. The provider will render a `div` and set all tokens as CSS variables on that element.
```

> Place a `<FluentProvider />` at the root of your app and pass a theme to the `theme` prop. The provider will render a `div` and set all tokens as CSS variables on that element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Place a `<FluentProvider />` at the root of your app and pass a theme to the `theme` prop. The provider will render a `div` and set all tokens as CSS variables on that element. The provider also propagates CCS variables to React portals created with [Portal component](?path=/docs/components-portal--default).
```

Useful or is it too much?

```jsx
import { FluentProvider, teamsLightTheme } from '@fluentui/react-components';

export const AppRoot = ({children}) => (
  <FluentProvider theme={teamsLightTheme}>
    {children}
  </FluentProvider>,
);
```

Import `tokens` to style a component using `makeStyles`

```jsx
import { tokens } from '@fluentui/react-theme';

const useStyles = makeStyles({
  root: { display: 'flex' },
  rootPrimary: { color: tokens.colorNeutralForeground3 },
});

export Component = props => {
  const classes = useStyles();

  return <div className={mergeClasses('ui-component', classes.root, props.primary && classes.rootPrimary)} />;
}
```

For more details, see [Styling components](?path=/docs/concepts-developer-styling-components--page).

### Do not use CSS variables directly

**⚠ Never use theme CSS variables directly!** The CSS variables implementation of the theme is internal to the library. We might eventually decide to change the variable names, hash them or even use direct values instead of some variables. Always use the `tokens` to access the theme.

## Available themes

Fluent UI currently exports following themes:

- Web Light (`webLightTheme`)
- Web Dark (`webDarkTheme`)

> - Web High Contrast (`webHighContrastTheme`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

#23083?

- Teams Light (`teamsLightTheme`)
- Teams Dark (`teamsDarkTheme`)
- Teams High Contrast (`teamsHighContrastTheme`)

### High contrast themes

> ⚠ Do not use High Contrast themes! All Fluent UI components support Windows High Contrast mode automatically regardless the used theme.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
⚠ Do not use High Contrast themes! All Fluent UI components support Windows High Contrast mode automatically regardless of the active theme.
```

> ⚠ Do not use High Contrast themes! All Fluent UI components support Windows High Contrast mode automatically regardless of the active theme.

Reviewer: Just wondering, is there sense to rename `teamsHighContrastTheme` to `legacyTeamsHighContrastTheme` then?

Author: let's discuss separately

Using Windows high contrast mode is recommended to all customers that are using Fluent UI.

Hardcoded High Contrast themes are considered legacy, to be used only in applications which explicitly support those.

## Customizing the theme

> There are multiple ways how an application can customize a theme.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Applications can customize a theme in multiple ways
```

### Custom Brand ramp

> Brand ramp is a color ramp going from dark to light colors:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The brand ramp is a color ramp going from dark to light colors:
```

> <img src={require('../../public/brand-ramp-example.png')} alt="Example of a brand ramp" />

Reviewer: Can we use a real component instead? We have a component for this ramp, so it will be always up to date.

Author: Neither the `Ramp` component nor the brand ramp itself is exported, leaving as screenshot for now.

A theme is a function of brand ramp. To use a theme with a custom brand ramp, instead of importing the pre-created theme, you can use theme factory functions.

The following factory functions are available:

- `createLightTheme()`
- `createDarkTheme()`
- `createTeamsDarkTheme()`
- `createHighContrastTheme()`

```tsx
import { BrandVariants, createLightTheme, createDarkTheme } from '@fluentui/react-components';

const customBrandRamp: BrandVariants = {
  10: '#008',
  //...
  160: '#88F',
};

export const customLightTheme = createLightTheme(customBrandRamp);
export const customDarkTheme = createDarkTheme(customBrandRamp);
```

### Overriding existing tokens

> If the existing tokens do not fulfill your needs, you should talk to your designer instead of overriding tokens.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
⚠️ If the existing tokens do not fulfill your needs, you should talk to your designer instead of overriding tokens.
```

> Theme is a flat object containing [token name; CSS value] pairs. You can copy the object and overwrite any tokens you wish.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A theme is a flat object containing [token name; CSS value] pairs. You can copy the object and overwrite any tokens you wish.
```

> A theme is a flat object containing [token name; CSS value] pairs. You can copy the object and overwrite any tokens you wish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A theme is a flat object containing `{ [token name]: CSS value }` pairs. You can copy the object and overwrite any tokens you wish.
```

nit: A bit confused me as it looks like a tuple, can we use TS-like syntax?

```tsx
import { webLightTheme, Theme } from '@fluentui/react-components';

export const customLightTheme: Theme = {
  ...webLightTheme,
  colorNeutralForeground1: '#555', // overriden token
};
```

### Extending theme with new tokens

Similarly to overriding existing tokens, you can add custom tokens as well.

> ⚠ Components which use custom tokens cannot be shared among applications. Keep in mind that once a component which uses custom tokens will be shared among applications, all the applications must also add the custom tokens. Instead of adding custom tokens inside potentially reusable components, you should talk to design.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
⚠ Components which use custom tokens cannot be shared between applications. Keep in mind that any application which uses a component with custom tokens must also add the custom tokens to its own themes. Instead of adding custom tokens inside potentially reusable components, you should talk to design.
```

```tsx
import { webLightTheme, Theme } from '@fluentui/react-components';

export const customLightTheme: Theme & { customSpacingVerticalHuge: string } = {
  ...webLightTheme,
  customSpacingVerticalHuge: '128px',
};
```

> To use the tokens in styles, one is supposed to import `tokens`. Obviously that object would not contain the custom tokens. For that reason you can use `themeToTokensObject()` which will create the tokens object with the custom tokens.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use the tokens in styles, one is supposed to import `tokens`. Obviously that object would not contain any custom tokens. For that reason you can use `themeToTokensObject()` utility which will create the tokens object with the custom tokens.
```
